1,'Irregular migration into UK and large European countries is same as 2008, research shows','The number of irregular migrants living in the UK and other large European countries has not changed for years despite hostile political discourse about migrants overwhelming the continent, according to researchers. Migration researchers from 18 of the world’s leading universities and research organisations including the University of Oxford have released the public database as part of the MIrreM project, which measures irregular migration. They said it is impossible to produce completely accurate data due to some people living below the radar for fear of immigration enforcement, but the methodology used is likely to produce more accurate estimates than previous research has done. The researchers found there were between 2.6 and 3.2 million irregular migrants living in 12 European countries, including the UK, between 2016 and 2023, representing less than 1% of the total population of these countries. Overall, the irregular migrant population across the European countries does not appear to have definitively changed since 2008. The estimated number of irregular migrants in the UK including asylum seekers, trafficking victims and undocumented migrants, is between 594,000 and 745,000 according to the report. The database significantly updates previous assessments of the irregular migrant population in Europe, such as the estimates by the Clandestino research project dating back to 2008 and a study by Pew Research Centre in 2019 and offers new information at a time when there have been fundamental changes in the European migration landscape. Irregular migration has been a key issue in successive elections in the UK and other European countries in recent years with politicians pledging to clamp down on immigration. This tends to be in response to a belief among many voters that too many migrants are arriving via clandestine means such as dinghies or concealing themselves in the backs of lorries. The new data challenges those perceptions. In 2008, Clandestino estimated the irregular migrant population of 12 European countries at 1.8m to 3.8m. The MIrreM project increases the low estimate by 780,000 and decreases the high estimate by 460,000, creating a clearer picture of the total irregular migrant population in the countries studied. The United States, which the new research used as a comparator, has the largest estimated irregular migrant population in terms of absolute numbers. Finland has the smallest estimated irregular migrant population in terms of its size. Compared with 2008 estimates, research from MIrreM indicates that in three countries, the new estimates suggest greater numbers – Austria, Germany and Spain. In five countries, the estimated irregular migrant population remained the same – Belgium, France, Italy, the United Kingdom and the United States. In five countries, it declined – Finland, Greece, Ireland, the Netherlands and Poland. Michele LeVoy, director of the Platform for International Cooperation on Undocumented Migrants, said the new data could help design policies for this often hard-to-reach group. “Estimating how many people are living in an irregular situation in Europe must be used to design inclusive policies that grant access to public services for this marginalised population, and that offer them pathways out of irregularity. Undocumented people are already part and parcel of our societies and it’s high time that Europe recognised this.” Louise Calvey, director of the charity Asylum Matters, welcomed the report. “The ‘migration crisis’ has been manufactured by failed governments and political leaders,” she said. “They’ve used this narrative to justify the most pernicious anti-migrant policies our country has ever seen, closing safe routes, closing the asylum system and leaving people stuck in an unending legal purgatory. “This report should be foundational to the Labour government’s approach to asylum and migration; work globally to build a fair and safe system of migration, treat people with dignity and respect, stop punishing people for needing to be here.” The report comes as Home Office figures showed a total of 973 migrants in 17 small boats crossed the Channel to the UK on Saturday – the same day four people died – making it the busiest day of the year so far. The arrivals brings the total for the year to 26,612 compared with 25,330 by the same date last year and 33,611 in 2022, with 1,368 having made the journey on Friday and Saturday combined, according to Home Office figures.','Researchers from leading universities found that the population of irregular migrants in 12 European countries, including the UK, has not significantly changed since 2008, with estimates between 2.6 and 3.2 million. The data challenges political narratives about immigration and emphasizes the need for inclusive policies towards undocumented migrants. The report comes amidst debates on migration policies and recent Home Office figures showing an increase in Channel crossings to the UK.','Research shows that the number of irregular migrants in large European countries has remained stable despite political rhetoric, challenging common perceptions.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/d5e69302e1abb7dbadbd7926178c46a9c406a823/0_66_1990_1194/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/07/irregular-migration-into-uk-and-large-european-countries-is-same-as-2008-research-shows','2024-10-06 23:01:05','2024-10-06 23:02:42'
2,'Israel on high alert for 7 October as it escalates Gaza and Lebanon conflicts','Israel will hold memorials for the first anniversary of the October 7 attacks on Monday as the war it launched in response escalates on two fronts, with heavy bombing raids and mass evacuation orders issued in Lebanon and Gaza amid the growing possibility of a retaliatory airstrike against Iran. As Israelis across the country prepared to mark one year since Hamas launched its devastating attack, a region that has spiralled into unprecedented crisis was on high alert. In Israel, authorities said they were on the lookout for attacks timed to coincide with the anniversary after a gunman opened fire on pedestrians in a central bus station in a city in the Negev desert, killing one and wounding 10 in the second attack in the last week. In Iran, airports announced on Sunday afternoon that they would cancel all flights in a potential indication that Tehran expected Israeli jets could strike in a raid that could be targeted against Iranian military, oil, or even nuclear production. However, flight restrictions were lifted after “ensuring safe conditions”, Iranian media said. Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, has vowed to retaliate against Iran for a recent ballistic missile strike on Israel but said he would choose the time and place. Washington has pleaded with him not to cross red lines that could send the region further into an all-out war. Senior White House and Pentagon officials have been in consultations with Israel over its expected retaliatory strike. Joe Biden has urged Netanyahu not to target Iranian nuclear or oil production, potentially prompting retaliatory attacks from Iran against vulnerable Israeli infrastructure. At the same time, the Biden administration looks increasingly unable to limit either Israel’s brinkmanship with Iran or its ground operations against the militias in Gaza and Lebanon that Tehran supports. For the first time in months, Israel sent a column of tanks into northern Gaza and launched major operations there, surrounding Jabalia, the largest of strip’s eight historic refugee camps, as strikes hit a mosque and a school in attacks that killed 24 and wounded nearly 100, according to the local Hamas-controlled government. The escalation in Gaza came after Israel’s attention largely had refocused toward its incursion into southern Lebanon, the largest military operation there since 2006. It appeared to defy analysts who said Israel would not attempt to fight a two-front war in both Lebanon and Gaza, as well as a tit-for-tat battle of airstrikes with Iran. But on Sunday, Israel issued a new blanket evacuation order for all of the northern Gaza Strip, where hundreds of thousands of civilians remain, as a military spokesperson declared a “new phase of the war” against Hamas. Local aid workers said the mosque, which was near al-Aqsa hospital in Deir al-Balah, had housed people who had been displaced in earlier bombing raids. The Israeli military claimed that the mosque had been a “Hamas command post”. Netanyahu visited troops near the Lebanese border on Sunday for the first time and declared that Israel would “emerge victorious” in the conflict, as European leaders including Keir Starmer issued renewed calls for a ceasefire to halt the simultaneous wars in Lebanon and Gaza that have killed more than 42,000 people in the last year. Late on Sunday night, Beirut’s southern suburbs came under renewed Israeli bombing with large fireballs and loud booms over the darkened skyline. Israeli attacks in the area, which is a stronghold for the Shia militia Hezbollah, have continued at such a high pace that rescue workers have been unable to access the area for days. Earlier on Sunday, an IDF spokesperson issued an “urgent warning to the residents of the southern suburbs to leave these areas. In the early hours of Monday, Hezbollah said it had targeted an Israeli military base near the northern city of Haifa. Israeli media reported 10 people were injured, while police said that some buildings and properties were damaged. Elsewhere in Israel, one woman was killed and 10 people were wounded in the suspected terror attack at the central bus station in Be’er Sheva, a city in the Negev desert in southern Israel. The assailant, identified as Ahmad al-Uqbi, 29, was killed by police. Photos and video posted on social media showed images of at least one person lying on the ground in a pool of blood next to a McDonald’s close to the bus station. In another video, gunshots could be heard as law enforcement officers ran through the station toward the shooting. After the attack, Miri Regev, Israel’s transportation minister, wrote that the family of the suspected attacker should be deported from the country. “The time has come for a deterrent punishment that prevents attacks on Israeli territory,” she wrote on X. As part of Monday’s commemorations for the Hamas attack, in which more than 1,200 people were killed and about 250 taken hostage, the president, Isaac Herzog, said he would conduct a three-day tour of the border communities along Gaza, beginning at the site of the Nova music festival near the Re’im kibbutz, where 364 people were killed. Israel’s ensuing invasion of Gaza has killed nearly 42,000 Palestinians, mostly civilians, including at least 16,000 children. As the anniversary of 7 October neared, Hamas on Sunday praised the attack as “glorious”. “The crossing of the glorious 7 October shattered the illusions the enemy had created for itself, convincing the world and the region of its supposed superiority and capabilities,” Qatar-based Hamas member Khalil al-Hayya said in a video statement. The anticipated retaliation against Iran follows a strike by Tehran that included more than 180 missiles, according to Israel, and managed to hit a crucial airbase more than 30 times. Speaking on Sunday, Yoav Gallant, the Israeli minister of defence, said the bombing had not affected the air force’s ability to operate, and vowed that Israel would strike back against Iran at a time of its choosing. “The Iranians did not touch the air force’s capabilities – no aircraft was damaged, no squadron was taken out of order,” Gallant said during a visit to the Nevatim airbase. He added: “Whoever thinks that a mere attempt to harm us will deter us from taking action should take a look at [Israel’s campaigns] in Gaza and Beirut.” Meanwhile, Netanyahu visited troops from the 36th division, one of two divisions sent there for combat operations, along the Lebanese border. In remarks, the prime minister said he wished to “extend my deepest condolences to the families of our heroes who fell today in Lebanon”. Israel has said dozens of its soldiers have been injured in Lebanon in the last week of combat, while Hezbollah claimed to have killed 20 soldiers over this weekend. “We’re in the heat of a gruelling war against Iran’s axis of evil, aimed at destroying us,” Netanyahu said. “That will not happen, because we shall stand together, and with God’s help, we shall emerge victorious together.” Iran’s foreign minister on Saturday warned that Tehran would retaliate if attacked by Israel. “Our reaction to any attack by the Zionist regime is completely clear,” Abbas Araghchi told reporters during a trip to Syria. “For every action, there will be a proportional and similar reaction from Iran, and even stronger.”','Israel marked the first anniversary of the October 7 attacks with memorials as tensions escalated in Lebanon, Gaza, and Iran. Retaliatory strikes against Iran were anticipated, while Israel engaged in military operations in Gaza and Lebanon. The escalation raised concerns of a broader conflict, with calls for a ceasefire. The article detailed recent events, including bombings, evacuations, and military actions, highlighting the complex and volatile situation in the region.','Israel commemorates first anniversary of October 7 attacks amidst escalating tensions and potential retaliatory strikes against Iran.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/f8732bb0574717b9f46f810dffc6860e2f36a6e9/0_272_5472_3283/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/israel-escalates-bombing-gaza-lebanon-iran-threat','2024-10-06 23:00:33','2024-10-07 01:15:50'
3,'‘I’m bracing for the worst’: Beirut’s youth adjust to an emptied city','As a powerful barrage of Israeli airstrikes pummelled Beirut’s southern suburbs overnight, cousins Nader Ismail and Lyne Nassar sat on a balcony in a nearby Baabda overwhelmed with shock. Ismail said the terror made him freeze where he sat, while Nassar said she stood up suddenly before sitting down and attempting to calm herself about what is now a near nightly occurrence. “It felt like we could feel the pressure waves from the bombings washing over us,” said Nassar. “The windows shook, the whole building shook. It was traumatising.” The 21-year-old medical student and her family first fled Beirut’s southern suburbs for the town of Aley in the mountains around the capital in late August, initially as a precaution. Ismail, 20, and his family joined them for the second time 10 days ago, fleeing the bombardments striking the Hezbollah stronghold of Dahiyeh and driving out residents to other parts of the city and surrounding areas. The cousins said the family home in the mountains is now so full with people that they had decided to take a break at the apartment in Baabda, even though it is closer to the airstrikes, but the intense wave of attacks that sent columns of smoke and fire into the night sky overnight has forced them to relocate back to Aley. The two students and their families are struggling to adapt quickly to the new reality of wartime, where the strikes have upended the lives of people across Beirut. In some parts of the city north of Dahiyeh, shops, bars and restaurants remain open but sometimes with limited hours, as people attempt to maintain a sense of normalcy and hope for a swift end to the conflict. Elsewhere, roads that are normally clogged with bumper-to-bumper traffic are conspicuously empty, with many that once filled the streets departing for the mountains around Beirut. One gym manager in the Achrafiyeh neighbourhood complained he had lost more than 100 members of his client base, as most have departed for other areas as a precaution, while those who are able have fled the country entirely. “The neighbourhood now is emptying out; a lot of middle- and upper-class people have gone to the north of Lebanon or the mountains,” said Mansour Aziz, the owner of Mezyan restaurant and bar in the heart of west Beirut’s Hamra district, a place long known for its bustling nightlife. Business had dipped by almost 80% over the last year as people stayed home to fearfully watch news of Israel’s war in Gaza, fearing what could happen in Lebanon, he said. “But now with this recent onslaught, the situation is very tense,” he said. “Things have changed – and obviously people are not in the mood to go out. The irony is that if you go north to Batroun or to the mountains, people are out and about.” He added: “I’m bracing for the worst to come – there’s talk of food supplies being affected. A lot of the big meat and vegetable suppliers are farmers in the south and the Bekaa, so if these lines are cut and farmers are fleeing, how is food going to reach us?” The sense of a new reality was compounded on Sunday when Lebanon’s education minister, Abbas Halabi, further delayed the new start date for the public school year to 4 November, citing the “security risks” from the Israeli airstrikes. Public school buildings across the country have now been converted into makeshift shelters housing more than 1 million displaced from across southern Lebanon and Beirut, and UN officials said late last week that almost 900 of these shelters are now full. Private schools and universities are trying to figure out whether they can move to online classes or shutter on a rolling basis. Nassar, who is in her third year as a medical student at the Lebanese University, pointed to the nightly bombardments that have struck close to its Laylaki campus in southern Beirut, and the uncertainty about when classes might resume. The semester was due to start on the day in late September that a wave of Israeli airstrikes on southern Lebanon killed 492 people and injured 1,645, she said, but it was delayed by a week. With the decision from the education minister to delay until early November, Nassar is uncertain when classes might resume given the damage to their campus. “If the strikes continue like this, there’s no way we can attend university as it’s so close by,” she said. Her parents are using their experience of the last time they fled southern Beirut, during Israel’s 2006 war with Hezbollah, to keep them calm, she added. The mall near the university campus where until recently Nassar used to meet her four closest friends to shop and spend hours chatting in the food court cafes has shuttered apart from a large supermarket inside, she said. Their group chat is now focused on ensuring the one friend who stayed behind survives the nightly airstrikes, doling out advice to make sure she opens the windows to avoid broken glass during the bombings. Ismail said the Antonine University where he studies computer science said late last week it would switch to online classes, which he dislikes. “It’s hard to study, the house is crowded and there’s stress from hearing the bombings,” he said. Nassar said that Aley is noticeably busier due to the influx of people. “The shops are open, the supermarkets are open but there’s a lot more traffic than usual, due to all the people coming. We’re starting to see a shortage of goods in the supermarket,” she added. “Basic things, like you might not always find toilet paper.”','Beirut residents, like Nader Ismail and Lyne Nassar, are facing trauma and displacement due to ongoing Israeli airstrikes. People are fleeing to safer areas, impacting businesses and daily life. Schools are converting into shelters, and universities are considering online classes. Shortages are appearing in supermarkets, and the population is experiencing stress and uncertainty amidst the conflict.','Beirut residents struggle to adapt to daily Israeli airstrikes, leading to displacement, disrupted education, and economic challenges.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/3ceb5510ea8100fc8583c57c074ee0163114a28a/0_347_5500_3300/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/im-bracing-for-worse-beiruts-youth-adjust-to-an-emptied-city','2024-10-06 19:13:50','2024-10-06 22:06:42'
4,'Lord Ouseley obituary','Herman Ouseley, who has died aged 79, was a public servant and campaigner who worked at three levels of government to bring an understanding of the challenges faced by the UK’s black population into the heart of the political establishment. He did so by creating a link between the neighbourhood-level impacts of racism and the possibility of using the institutions of government to deliver change, during a period when Britain was moving on painfully from the early post-Windrush decades to the multiracial society it is today. Working in community relations in south London in the 1970s, Ouseley became head of a pioneering ethnic minorities unit at the Greater London council under Ken Livingstone in the 80s and was appointed in the 90s as chair of the Commission for Racial Equality, where one of his most high-profile achievements was to establish the Let’s Kick Racism Out of Football programme to tackle the racial abuse of professional footballers. Despite other possibilities open to him, Ouseley chose the government route to tackling racial discrimination, and it was only after a career in government administration that he went on to become a campaigner, albeit within politically non-aligned bodies. This approach allowed him a degree of independence that made it easier for the establishment to accept someone with radical aspirations in terms of equality and racial justice. Ouseley was born in British Guiana (now Guyana). His father, a baker, died when he was seven, after which his mother remarried and moved to the UK to work as a nurse. Initially Herman remained in British Guiana, but at the age of 11 he moved to live with his mother in Peckham, south-east London, attending William Penn school in Dulwich and then Catford College. This was a London where race riots took place in 1958, two years after his arrival. Gangs of young white men, spurred on by far-right politicians, rioted in Notting Hill against the local Caribbean population. Black people in Britain were the object of virtually unchallenged racism until the passage of the Race Relations Act, 1965, and Ouseley recalled that “I was called a black bastard and beaten up on the way home from school.” He started his local government career as a clerical officer at Middlesex county council in 1963, then became a community relations worker in a Lambeth council-supported organisation helping young black people. By the end of the 70s he ran Lambeth’s community relations unit, which proved a stepping stone to the GLC, where he became head of its ethnic minorities unit from 1981 to 1984. Livingstone was leader of the GLC at the time, in charge of a radical administration that prioritised initiatives and funding for minority communities. Like Livingstone, Ouseley believed in the need for deliberate policies to promote more black people and, among other things, to confront racism in textbooks. Such policies were often lampooned at the time but are now seen as mainstream. No less radical and controversial than the GLC was Lambeth council, to where Ouseley next moved, as assistant chief executive in 1984. At the time “Red” Ted Knight was leader, engaged in a full-throttle fight with Margaret Thatcher’s government over rate capping. But the council’s administration was in a poor state, with its leadership more interested in ideology than running services effectively, and Ouseley left in 1986 to become director of education at the Inner London Education Authority (Ilea). The GLC was abolished that year, leaving Ilea as a residual curiosity, running schools and colleges in the inner London boroughs. Ouseley went on to be its chief executive from 1988 to 1990 until it, too, was abolished. After Ilea he became chief executive of Lambeth council, starting the long process of rebuilding its poorly run services. He was thus employed throughout a decade of political struggle between an ideological Conservative government and radical Labour local authorities. It is hard to exaggerate how bitter the political mood was. Running complex public services in a vast city is difficult at the best of times, but Ouseley was adept at surviving, in part because he treated politicians on all sides with respect. In 1993 the Conservative home secretary Kenneth Clarke appointed Ouseley to chair the CRE, feeling that his performance in starting to turn Lambeth around showed that he might be able to get to grips with the CRE’s own internal strife. Ouseley’s greatest mark at the CRE came to be seen as his creation of Let’s Kick Racism Out of Football, later shortened to Kick It Out, which he formally launched alongside the Chelsea player Paul Elliott, with support from the Professional Footballers Association chair Gordon Taylor and black players, including Wimbledon’s John Fashanu. Ouseley explained at the time that when he himself started playing club football in the 60s “changing rooms were filled with talk of the N word … You had to keep your cool or leave. I wasn’t prepared to walk away.”By getting high-profile clubs involved, Ouseley was able to encourage others to join, though it proved hard to convince some clubs and managers that there really was a problem. He fought not only for black players but against antisemitic chanting, and remained chair of Kick It Out for 25 years. Ouseley’s willingness to confront controversial issues affecting the politics of race relations was clear in a report he wrote in 2001, the year after he left the CRE, about race relations in Bradford, commissioned by Bradford Vision, a local organisation chaired by the Conservative council leader Margaret Eaton. Ouseley pointed to communities’ ignorance of each other and the influence of segregated schooling within the city. “Different cultural communities believe they get nothing, while others get all the benefits,” he said, in remarks that could easily be applied to many parts of Britain today. West Yorkshire police were criticised in his report for being afraid to tackle ethnic minority crime for fear of being labelled racist. From 1997 to 2019 Ouseley chaired the London-based Chandran Foundation, which provides education and employment opportunities for disadvantaged young people. He was also a longstanding council member on the Institute of Race Relations, and chaired the Ujima and Carib housing associations. Knighted in 1997, he was made a peer in 2001, sitting as a crossbencher in the House of Lords, where he spoke mainly on equality, policing, education and sport. He sat on the board of the Manchester United Foundation and was a fan of that club as well as Millwall and Dulwich Hamlet. In 1972 he married Margaret (nee Neill), a teacher. She survives h im, along with a son and a daughter. • Herman George Ouseley, Lord Ouseley, public servant and campaigner, born 24 March 1945; died 2 October 2024','Herman Ouseley, a British Guiana-born public servant and campaigner, dedicated his career to tackling racial discrimination in the UK. He worked in community relations in south London in the 1970s, led the ethnic minorities unit at the Greater London council in the 80s, and chaired the Commission for Racial Equality in the 90s. Ouseley notably established the Let’s Kick Racism Out of Football program to combat racial abuse in professional football. His advocacy for equality and racial justice continued through various roles and organizations, making a lasting impact on race relations in Britain.','Herman Ouseley, a public servant and campaigner, worked to address racial discrimination in the UK through government roles and non-aligned activism.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/4987bd7b25b6b5f283bd0cc8e40a271a0ff51b13/0_312_3744_2246/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/lord-herman-ouseley-obituary','2024-10-06 16:52:07','2024-10-06 16:54:13'
5,'Climbers rescued after being stranded in Himalayas for three days','A British mountaineer and her American companion who had been stranded in the Himalayas for three days without food have been rescued. Fay Manners, 37, and Michelle Dvorak, 31, had been climbing the Chaukhamba mountain in northern India, when they issued an SOS message on Thursday, with nothing further being heard from them. The pair reported that they had lost their tent and climbing equipment after it was dragged into a ravine by a rockfall. On Sunday, a spokesperson for India’s disaster management agency said that the two women had been found stranded at an altitude of about 6,000m. He said: “Both mountaineers are safe, but they look very exhausted.” The rescue operation took 80 hours to complete and involved the Indian air force and army, the Indian news agency Ians reported. Manners, originally from Bedford, told local reporters: “We were pulling up my bag and she [Dvorak] had her bag on her. And the rockfall came, cut the rope with the other bag, and it just went down the entire mountain. “We sent a message to our friends and they knew … They had told [the rescue team]: ‘They are stuck on the mountain, they have no equipment.’ So then this other team [of mountaineers] came to help us.” An experienced climber, Manners is sponsored by brands including The North Face and had requested permission, along with her companion, from the local authorities to climb the peak. They were reportedly airlifted by an Indian air force helicopter to a helipad at Joshimath, a town 21 miles south-east of Chaukhamba, at 7am local time on Sunday. In a statement on X, the Indian air force said: “The rescue of two foreign (US &amp; UK) mountaineers from Chaukhamba III trek in Uttarakhand’s Chamoli is a testament to the resilience and skill of the Indian air force, along with the collaborative efforts of SDRF, NIM and French mountaineers. “After battling two days of bad weather, the IAF’s Cheetah helicopter airlifted the climbers from 17,400 feet, showcasing remarkable coordination in extreme conditions.” A French climbing party helped with the rescue after the group helped them descend to the altitude from which they were eventually airlifted, according to the air force. A Foreign Office spokesperson said: “We have been supporting the family of a British woman reported missing in India who has since been safely rescued.”','British mountaineer Fay Manners and her American companion Michelle Dvorak were stranded in the Himalayas for three days without food after losing their tent and climbing equipment to a rockfall. They issued an SOS message, leading to a rescue operation involving the Indian air force, army, and French mountaineers. The pair, found at an altitude of 6,000m, were airlifted to safety and reported to be safe but exhausted. Manners, sponsored by The North Face, and Dvorak were helped by a French climbing party and successfully rescued after battling adverse weather conditions.','British and American mountaineers stranded in the Himalayas for three days without food are rescued with the help of Indian air force and army.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/fb598f35d4605accae2f35b6d4c268312053c716/0_0_1300_780/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/climbers-rescued-after-being-stranded-in-himalayas-for-three-days','2024-10-06 16:33:38','2024-10-06 17:23:16'
6,'Failed by leaders on both sides in the Middle East','Jonathan Freedland’s plea that those on each side of the seemingly eternal conflict in the Middle East try “to see how things look from the other side” seems doomed to fall on deaf ears (A brutal year and a tale of two Israels: the one that is feared and the one that is fearful, 4 October). It is increasingly clear that all citizens in the region are being failed by their leaders. Hamas’s leaders deny the horrific crimes of 7 October 2023, yet we know them to be true. Their decision to attack Israel a year ago was both heinous and strategically disastrous for the people they claim to represent. Israel’s war cabinet must also be held to account for a scorched-earth policy with no regard for loss of innocent life in pursuit of goals which, even if achieved in the short term at exceedingly high costs, will only foster long-term animosity for generations to come. Raja Shehadeh claims Israel must realise the cost of killing Palestinians for the bloodshed to stop (When will this horror end? When Israel realises that the cost of destroying us is too high, 5 October). But this applies to all sides; the leadership on both sides must confront the eternal truth that neither side can ever destroy the other, that the short-horizon instinct on each side to “hit back” will never succeed. Nick Mayer Southampton • Perhaps Jonathan Freedland’s very compelling piece should have been titled “the three Israels”. As a Jew who has lived in Israel, has family there, and has suffered antisemitism in Argentina, I am surprised at the omission of the role extreme Jewish religious parties play in the situation in the Middle East. Their sense of biblical entitlement to the whole of the land of Israel further ignites the indiscriminate toll of death. If Iran is a theocracy, Israel is also becoming one. The level of hate between, and indoctrination of, Israelis and Palestinians will take generations to resolve. Politicians with long-term vision, with a sense of morality and humanity, are needed to achieve peace. I hope the people of the Middle East find these leaders soon. Yuti Chernajovsky Whitstable, Kent • Thank you for the article by Jonathan Freedland. The divisions within Israeli society itself should be mentioned. Yes, the Israeli perspective of the war and its origins is something that unites Israelis. But there is a deep division in Israeli society about the steps to be taken to end the conflict. Many Israelis believe that ending the war in Gaza is the necessary step to be taken to bring back the hostages. Others believe that only the strong continued military response can save the hostages, and that only the complete defeat of Hamas can end the war in Gaza. The former are demonstrating daily all over the country, outside the prime minister’s house and those of other ministers and cabinet members. The country is torn, and there does not seem to be a rational way to bring an end to either the external conflict or the internal one. Orna Bird London • Jonathan Freedland’s contrast between the Israel outsiders see and the Israel insiders perceive is well made. But the stories of personal terror, grief and utter defencelessness could as well be told from the Palestinian side. Isn’t the real contrast in this war, as in all wars, between the everyday people whose lives are destroyed – as soldiers as well as civilians – and the political and military leaders who believe that violence is the way to achieve their ambitions, and those whose support enables them to pursue this deadly folly? Sarah White Bath','The article highlights the failure of leaders on both sides of the conflict in the Middle East, particularly focusing on Hamas's attacks on Israel and Israel's scorched-earth policy. It emphasizes the need for all sides to realize the futility of trying to destroy each other and the importance of long-term vision, morality, and humanity in achieving peace. The article also addresses the divisions within Israeli society and calls for rational solutions to end both external and internal conflicts.','Article discusses the ongoing conflict in the Middle East and the need for leaders on all sides to find a peaceful resolution.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/8e05db9a53b386ac4c83c6802745b2fe4f55fe1d/0_125_3744_2246/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/failed-by-leaders-on-both-sides-in-the-middle-east','2024-10-06 16:21:07','2024-10-06 16:24:10'
7,'Western leaders’ silence about Israel’s atrocities gives free rein to Netanyahu','Owen Jones speaks for many of us (What atrocity would Israel have to commit for our leaders to break their silence?, 3 October). Joe Biden, Keir Starmer and other western leaders have responded to Israel’s actions by repeatedly stating that they stand with Israel and its right to defend itself. They have been quick to vociferously condemn those who threaten or attack Israel, but silent on the atrocities Israel inflicts on tens of thousands of innocent civilians in neighbouring countries. Benjamin Netanyahu has interpreted this silence as permission to pursue his strategy without effective censure or sanction. Therefore the question remains of whether these political leaders are complicit in the killing of thousands of innocent civilians, the creation of millions of refugees and the destruction of towns and cities. Like many others, I yearn to see brave political leadership willing to speak out and challenge Israel’s right to act without adherence to fundamental humanitarian rights and principles of international law. Without such a voice being heard, there will be no end to this humanitarian tragedy. Peter Riddle Wirksworth, Derbyshire','The article criticizes Joe Biden, Keir Starmer, and other western leaders for supporting Israel's actions and staying silent on the atrocities inflicted on innocent civilians. The author questions whether these leaders are complicit in the killing of civilians and destruction caused by Israel's actions. There is a call for brave political leadership to challenge Israel's disregard for humanitarian rights and international law to put an end to the ongoing tragedy.','The article criticizes political leaders for supporting Israel despite its atrocities and calls for brave leadership to challenge Israel's actions.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/8df3fb63b3634a4118ce8f610446c2bfdecf17d0/0_367_5500_3300/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/western-leaders-silence-about-israel-atrocities-gives-free-rein-to-netanyahu','2024-10-06 16:20:22','2024-10-06 16:24:10'
8,'The nightmare of being a disabled Palestinian','I have just read Frances Ryan’s column (Disabled Palestinians are facing horrors piled upon horrors. I think of their suffering every day, 4 October). Among the many tragedies and inhumanity in the Middle East that we have read about, I find it gut-wrenching on a personal level to hear these nightmarish stories of thousands being left unable to use their “legs” (what I call my wheelchair) because it lies beneath the rubble that was once their safe place – their home; or going without essential medical treatment, and thus suffering well-avoidable declines in health. It is terrible that more and more are added to the legion of people destined to be unable to run, to hide, to care for themselves or to protect their loved ones, as the hours and days go by. After reading the article, I stared at the words for a long time. I felt like I’d been punched in the stomach. Having a disability, as I do, is never simple or easy; sometimes it’s hard, sometimes it’s impossible. What the Palestinian civilians are going through is incomprehensible to me and surely a war crime? Emma Vinicombe Alfreton, Derbyshire','The article describes the horrific experiences of disabled Palestinians in the Middle East, highlighting the tragedy of being trapped under rubble, denied medical treatment, and facing deteriorating health. The author empathizes with their struggles, feeling personally affected as a person with a disability. The situation is deemed incomprehensible and possibly constituting war crimes.','The article shares the heartbreaking plight of disabled Palestinians facing unimaginable suffering in the Middle East conflicts.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/2d482c59273055a4347a7279babb3d2360411537/0_346_5184_3110/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/the-nightmare-of-being-a-disabled-palestinian','2024-10-06 16:19:27','2024-10-06 16:23:10'
9,'Iran seeks to stir up conflict, not avoid it','Esfandyar Batmanghelidj says, in the words of the headline on his article in the print edition, that “Iran is running out of ways to avoid conflict with Israel” (Journal, 1 October). How about abandoning the idea of military conflict with Israel altogether? How about accepting that water cannot be made to flow uphill and that military defeat of Israel is impossible? How about acknowledging that Iran’s backing for Hamas and Hezbollah is cruel and stupid in equal measure and that the people who suffer most from this policy are the Palestinians? Roger Fisken Ashampstead, Berkshire • Iran’s problems with Israel are of the ayatollahs’ own making. Esfandyar Batmanghelidj knows the cascades of clerical and other insults, defamation and material assistance to Hamas, Hezbollah and the Houthis that Iran has heaped on Israel these 40 years without due cause. These are not “ways to avoid conflict with Israel”. Frank Adam Prestwich, Greater Manchester','The article highlights Esfandyar Batmanghelidj's perspective on Iran's dwindling options to avoid conflict with Israel, proposing a shift towards peace by renouncing military confrontation. It questions Iran's support for Hamas and Hezbollah, emphasizing the futility of military defeat of Israel and the detrimental impact on Palestinians.','The article discusses Iran's escalating tensions with Israel and suggests abandoning the idea of military conflict for peace.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/2004a436d0daa6a4bee33c8ae6543abc2e231737/0_70_2085_1251/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/iran-seeks-to-stir-up-conflict-not-avoid-it','2024-10-06 16:17:49','2024-10-06 16:24:09'
10,'Netanyahu hits out at Macron over call for halt to arms exports to Israel','A call by Emmanuel Macron for a halt in arms supplies to Israel for use in Gaza has been met with an angry rebuttal from the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. The French president’s comments were directed mainly at the US and were part of continuing French efforts to revive its call for a ceasefire in Lebanon. France provides few arms to Israel but is keen to strengthen its longstanding influence in Lebanon by showing it wants the US to put some genuine pressure on Israel to accept a ceasefire. Washington appeared to mount little diplomatic resistance when Israel – after sending mixed signals – rejected a US-French plan for a 21 day ceasefire in Lebanon announced at the UN in New York nearly a fortnight ago. In an interview recorded on Monday, but broadcast on Saturday, Macron told France Inter radio: “I think that today, the priority is that we return to a political solution, that we stop supplying weapons to lead the fighting in Gaza.” “France is not supplying them,” he immediately clarified, indirectly turning the spotlight on the US, Israel’s main arms supplier. He also warned about “a resentment that is being born, a hatred that is being fuelled by this” . Lebanon could not be turned into another Gaza, he added. Repeating his call on Sunday, Macron’s office said he favoured a halt to arms exports for use in Gaza because a ceasefire is needed to stop the mounting violence and “clear the way to the political solutions needed for the security of Israel and the whole Middle East”. His comments brought a swift response from Netanyahu. “As Israel fights the forces of barbarism led by Iran, all civilised countries should be standing firmly by Israel’s side,” he said in a statement. “Yet, President Macron and other western leaders are now calling for arms embargoes against Israel. Shame on them.” Macron also announced he was convening an international conference on aid to Lebanon and the establishment of Lebanese government armed troops on the border with Israel. The Israeli attacks on Lebanon are designed to destroy the Iranian-backed Hezbollah group that has been firing rockets into Israel in support of Hamas, which mounted the attack on Israel from Gaza on 7 October 2023. Macron’s remarks, welcomed by the Lebanese, Qatari and Egyptian governments as well as the Palestinian Authority, may reflect French concern that some officials in the White House appeared to be willing to be relaxed to the point of welcoming the Israeli rejection of the French-US plan for a 21-day ceasefire. Few US officials have condemned Israel for escalating the conflict. The headline row about arms sales comes amid diplomatic efforts to end a two-year deadlock in Lebanon about the election of a president. With Hezbollah having sustained heavy losses to its leadership from Israeli strikes, there is pressure on the group’s political wing to let the election go ahead and for the military wing to accept a peace deal decoupled from a ceasefire in Gaza. Hezbollah’s stated position until recently has been no elections preceding a ceasefire in Lebanon, and no ceasefire in Lebanon without a ceasefire in Gaza. Since the end of the term of the former president Michel Aoun in 2022, Lebanon has been in political deadlock with its 128 strong factionalised parliament unable to secure the required constitutional majority for any candidate. The US is said to be in favour of exploiting Hezbollah’s weakness to install as president the army commander-in-chief, Gen Joseph Aoun. It is unlikely Tehran would be willing to back such a move..','French President Emmanuel Macron urges a halt in arms supplies to Israel for Gaza to prioritize a political solution and ceasefire, drawing ire from Israeli PM Benjamin Netanyahu. Macron aims to strengthen French influence in Lebanon and press the US to pressure Israel for a ceasefire. Diplomatic tensions rise as US-French ceasefire plan for Lebanon is rejected by Israel, prompting Macron to convene an international conference on aid to Lebanon. Amidst a two-year political deadlock in Lebanon, efforts are made to exploit Hezbollah's weakness to elect Gen Joseph Aoun as president.','French President Macron calls for a halt in arms supplies to Israel for Gaza use, sparking anger from Israeli PM Netanyahu amidst diplomatic efforts to revive a ceasefire in Lebanon.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/0ee716ec84935c672593934fa57af37bbb564e1b/0_103_6000_3601/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/netanyahu-hits-out-at-macron-over-call-for-halt-to-arms-exports-to-israel','2024-10-06 16:07:10','2024-10-07 00:51:26'
11,'Israel’s lack of vision in multi-fronted war may be fatally exposed','As Israelis approached the beginning of the high holy days last week on the eve of Rosh Hashanah, the news began to circulate. Several IDF units fighting on the border with Lebanon had taken casualties in at least two different locations. Soldiers had died in combat, and many were wounded. The confirmation of the wounded and dead, if not the circumstances served as a stark reminder for Israelis of the blows that come in war, even as Israel’s punishing air offensive has killed hundreds of Lebanese and wounded more. The soldiers’ deaths came after two weeks in which Israel struck a series of blows against Hezbollah, including the assassination of the group’s leader, Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah, and most of the top leadership. Underlining that sense of hazard was another story that revealed itself slowly last week: how the wave of Iranian missiles launched against Israel had not been as inconsequential as initially claimed by Israel’s leadership, and instead shown that a large-scale strike could not only overwhelm Israel’s anti-missile defences but that Tehran could accurately explode warheads on the targets it was aiming for, in this case several military bases. All of which raises serious questions as Israel prepares for a “significant” military response to Iran for the its missile attack. A year into Israel’s fast metastasising multi-front war that now includes Iran, Lebanon and Gaza, Yemen, Syria and Iraq, Israel’s undoubted military and intelligence superiority is faltering on several fronts. In Israel’s expanding war, as Israeli security analyst Michael Milshtein told the Guardian last week, there have been “tactical victories” but “no strategic vision” and certainly not one that unites the different fronts. What is clear is that the conflict of the last year has seriously exposed Israel’s newly minted operational doctrine, which had planned for fighting short decisive wars largely against non-state actors armed with missiles, with the aim of avoiding being drawn into extended conflicts of attrition. Instead, the opposite has happened. While Israeli officials have tried to depict Hamas as defeated as a military force – a questionable characterisation in the first place – they concede that it survives as a guerilla organisation in Gaza, although degraded. Even as Israel has killed more than 40,000 Palestinians in Gaza, levelled large areas of the coastal strip and displaced a population assailed by hunger, death and sickness on multiple occasions, Israeli armour was assaulting areas of the strip once more this weekend in a new operation into northern Gaza to prevent Hamas regrouping. Hezbollah too, despite sustaining heavy losses in its leadership, retains a potency fighting on its own terrain in the villages of southern Lebanon where it has had almost two decades to prepare for this conflict. All of which raises serious questions as to whether Israel has any clearer vision for its escalating conflict with Iran. A long-distance war with Iran, many experts are beginning to suggest, could also devolve into a more attritional conflict despite the relative imbalances in capabilities, even as Israel continues to plan for the scale of its own response to last week’s missile attack. Speaking to Bloomberg TV, Carmiel Arbit, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Middle East programme, described that dynamic. “I think we are going to be looking at this as the new reality for a long time,” Arbit predicted. “I think the question is simply going to be how often is the tit for tat going to happen, and is it just going to be tit for tat, or is this going to escalate only further. And I think the hope of the international community at this point is to avert a world war three rather than this smaller-scale war of attrition.” Nicole Grajewski, a fellow at of the Carnegie Endowment for Peace, echoes that view in part, while cautioning that an extended series of exchanges could push Tehran to a less predictable reaction. “The continued asymmetrical tit-for-tat between Iran and Israel risks devolving into a futile cycle of Iranian missile strikes and Israeli retaliations, each exposing Tehran’s military limitations while failing to alter the balance – and potentially driving Iran toward more desperate and unpredictable measures in its quest for credible deterrence.” “In the long term – and it cannot be assumed that the Israeli-Iranian conflict will end soon,” wrote Haaretz’s main military analyst, Amos Harel, “there will be competition between the production rate and sophistication of Iran’s offensive systems on one side and of Israel’s interception systems on the other.” With Israel now so deeply immersed in a widening conflict, it is unclear whether it can escape what Anthony Pfaff, the director of the Strategic Studies Institute at the US Army War College, in August called the “escalatory trap”. “If Israel escalates,” wrote Pfaff, “it fuels the escalatory spiral that could, at some point, exceed its military capability to manage. “If it chooses the status quo, where Hamas remains capable of terrorist operations, then it has done little to improve its security situation. Neither outcome achieves Israel’s security objectives … Forcing the choice between escalation and the status quo gives Iran, and, by extension, Hezbollah, an advantage and is a key feature of its proxy strategy.”','As Israel approaches the high holy days, IDF units suffer casualties in border clashes with Lebanon, highlighting the toll of war amid airstrikes on Hezbollah. Israel's military superiority falters as it grapples with a multi-front conflict involving Iran, Lebanon, Gaza, Yemen, Syria, and Iraq. The strategic vision is questioned as conflicts escalate, posing challenges against non-state actors like Hamas and Hezbollah. Experts express concerns over a potential long-lasting war of attrition with Iran, impacting regional stability and international efforts to prevent escalation.','Israelis face casualties in border skirmishes with Lebanon and struggle in multi-front conflict involving Iran, Lebanon, and Gaza.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/53d846ef7777663f6693cdf042f2c9ecd14373ed/0_213_6000_3600/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/israel-iran-war-idf-lebanon-military-doctrine','2024-10-06 15:20:53','2024-10-07 00:52:00'
12,'Marseille drug wars in spotlight again after boy, 14, allegedly hired as hitman','Marseille’s long-running drug turf wars are under a renewed spotlight after a 14-year-old boy was allegedly hired as a hitman via social media and promised €50,000 (£42,000) by a prisoner to carry out a revenge killing. The teenager is alleged to have been recruited by the 23-year-old inmate who later called the police from his prison cell to report the boy after he allegedly shot dead a 36-year-old man. An investigation has been opened into alleged murder and conspiracy to murder by a criminal gang. Police are trying to determine why the prisoner reported his own alleged recruit to police. The Marseille prosecutor, Nicolas Bessone, described the latest incident as “unprecedented savagery” in a press conference on Sunday, saying two recent crimes involving teenagers showed that drug turf wars were dragging in the “ultra-young”, who were being enlisted by gangs to carry out increasingly violent crimes. He said there was a “complete loss of bearings” with teenagers involved in crimes. On Friday, a 36-year-old taxi driver from the firm Bolt, who was well-known in Marseille as an amateur footballer, was found shot dead by a bullet to the head in his car not far from the city’s main train station. He was described by the prosecutor as having nothing to do with the drugs trade in the Mediterranean port city and although he was “coldly shot” in the back of the head, he was not believed to have been the intended target. Bessone said: “[The prisoner] recruited a 14-year-old minor from Vaucluse and organised the logistics for him to be collected by car and brought to a hotel room in Marseille. The young boy was carrying his own 357 Magnum revolver”. The boy allegedly had been instructed to carrying out a shooting and was told to travel by car. He asked the driver to wait, and when he refused the boy shot him in the back of the head, authorities said. The 14-year-old then allegedly fled the scene and hid nearby, calling his contacts and asking them to come and get him. But instead, the prisoner who had ordered the killing called police to report the boy, giving them his exact location, the prosecutor said. The boy was arrested and was being questioned. Bessone said the exact reason for the jailed man calling the police, and saying he was acting for a drug gang, remained to be determined. The prisoner went before a judge on Sunday and was charged in the case. The prosecutor said the 14-year-old boy was hired to carry out a revenge killing over the death of a 15-year-old boy last Wednesday. The same prisoner had last week contacted a 15-year-old boy online saying he would pay him €2,000 to intimidate a competitor from a rival drugs gang by setting fire to his door. The boy was tasked with shooting at the man’s door and setting it alight. But the teenager was spotted by members of a rival gang who the prosecutor said “stabbed him 50 times” then set him on fire, killing him. The 14-year-old boy was then allegedly hired online a few days later to avenge that killing. Marseille, France’s second-largest city, is also one of the poorest in France and is plagued by drug-related violence, which the president, Emmanuel Macron, pledged this year to stamp out. The city has in recent years witnessed a turf war for control of the highly profitable drug market between various clans. Bessone said victims and perpetrators of such violence were getting increasingly younger. The two latest deaths mean that the number of drug-related killings in Marseille has risen to 17 since the start of the year. Forty-nine people were killed in drug related violence in the city in 2023.','In Marseille, a 14-year-old boy was recruited via social media by a 23-year-old inmate as a hitman to carry out a revenge killing, resulting in the death of a 36-year-old man. The prisoner reported the boy to the police after the incident, sparking an investigation into murder and conspiracy to murder. This incident sheds light on the city's drug turf wars involving increasingly younger individuals and escalating violence, with the number of drug-related killings reaching 17 since the beginning of the year in Marseille.','A 14-year-old boy allegedly hired as a hitman in Marseille's drug turf wars by a prisoner, leading to a series of violent incidents.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/c00b7e073f6bbd49f35598148238ad4502388428/0_0_3775_2265/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/marseille-drug-wars-in-spotlight-again-after-boy-14-hired-as-hitman-in-revenge-killing','2024-10-06 14:30:36','2024-10-06 15:22:48'
13,'Tropical Storm Milton expected to wallop Florida days after Helene','Florida is expected to get walloped by another hurricane next week, just 10 days after it was hit by Hurricane Helene, which caused widespread storm surge and wind damage before it moved inland to cause devastating flooding. The latest system, Tropical Storm Milton, formed in the Gulf of Mexico on Saturday. Forecasters expect the storm to quickly strengthen into a hurricane and rush toward Florida in the next few days. Florida’s governor, Ron DeSantis, declared a state of emergency in 35 counties ahead of the storm’s potential landfall. The National Hurricane Center (NHC) in Florida said Milton, which could become a hurricane on Monday, is expected to bring surge and high winds to the recovering west coast and serious flood risks to south and central Florida. Jamie Rhome, the deputy director of the NHC in Miami, said Milton could develop into a “potentially very impactful hurricane” and hit Florida’s Gulf coast on Tuesday or Wednesday. Milton is expected to pack maximum sustained winds of 110mph when it makes landfall near St Petersburg and Tampa as a category 2 to category 3 hurricane, Rhome said. Category 3 and above are considered “major” hurricanes. Tropical Storm Milton’s center was about 860 miles (1,385km) west-south-west of Tampa, Florida, early Sunday, heading east at 5mph with maximum sustained winds of 60mph (95kph), the National Hurricane Center in Miami said. “Milton is moving slowly but is expected to strengthen rapidly,” the center said. “There is increasing confidence that a powerful hurricane with life-threatening hazards will be affecting portions of the Florida west coast around the middle of this week.” “Regardless of where the storm tracks, it’s going to produce a large area of heavy rain and potential flooding,” Rhome said on Saturday. “Even if this doesn’t realize a high-end wind core, it will have the potential for significant surge inundation,” Andrew Moore, a meteorologist for Arch Reinsurance, wrote on X. A major factor in predicting Milton’s increasing strength is that surface sea temperatures, or SSTs, did not cool off after Helene passed over and remain significantly above normal. “Most of the Gulf is above-average SST still, and the loop current is prominent. Shelf south of Tampa is extremely warm as well. Lots of potential fuel,” wrote Andy Hazelton, an associate scientist at the hurricane research department at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In Florida, since many of the 35 counties now in a state of emergency for Milton are still recovering from Hurricane Helene, DeSantis asked the Florida division of emergency management and the Florida department of transportation to coordinate all available resources and personnel to supplement local communities as they expedite debris removal. Separately, the NHC said on Sunday another storm, Hurricane Kirk, diminished to a category 2 hurricane in the open Atlantic early, with top winds of 105mph (165kph), sending large swells and “life-threatening surf and rip current conditions” to Bermuda and northward along the US and Canadian coasts. Hurricane Leslie also was moving north-west over the open Atlantic, with top winds of 85mph (140kph) but posing no threats to land.','Tropical Storm Milton is forecasted to rapidly strengthen into a hurricane and make landfall near St Petersburg and Tampa with maximum sustained winds of 110mph, posing significant risks to Florida's west coast. The storm, forming just after Hurricane Helene, is expected to bring storm surge, high winds, and serious flood threats to south and central Florida. Governor Ron DeSantis declared a state of emergency in 35 counties as preparations are made for the potential impact.','Tropical Storm Milton expected to strengthen into a hurricane and hit Florida's Gulf coast, bringing surge, high winds, and flood risks.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/6048cc1b955d260b98b07c0aa40006cd82608a18/0_400_6000_3600/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/05/tropical-storm-milton-florida','2024-10-06 14:02:56','2024-10-06 17:28:30'
14,'Australian Jews grappling with dissolving unity and the rise in antisemitism a year on from 7 October','Ten days after the Hamas attacks that triggered the start of the Israel-Gaza war, Ayelet Nussbaum’s niece and nephew fled from Haifa in northern Israel. “We’re very relieved – we were very nervous,” the Australian-Israeli florist from Glebe in New South Wales told Guardian Australia when she met her relatives at Sydney airport. Within about a month of that first repatriation flight, Haifa was deemed safe enough for them to return home. To the south, the bombardment of Gaza picked up pace. Ten grim months on, those children are again facing upheaval as Nussbaum’s brother and sister-in-law weigh up whether to flee the city, 30km from Lebanon’s border, amid escalating hostilities. In Lebanon more than 1,000 people were killed in the fortnight after September’s pager attacks on Hezbollah, and authorities say more than a million people have been displaced. In Haifa, schools have closed, the family of five is taking shelter in a bunker and Nussbaum’s elder nephew is days away from being called up to military service, she says. As she mourns the lack of humanity in Israel’s actions, she also longs for security for the country. “There should always be empathy,” she says of Israel’s right to protect itself, “but … everything feels like it’s heading towards complete destruction.” Much changed on 7 October – and its reverberations continue to rock Australia’s Jewish community. That diaspora is variously, and often in combination, supportive of Israel, empathetic towards Palestinians, targeted by hate and exhausted by conflict. For a brief moment after the “deep and personal horrors” of 7 October – more Jews were killed that day than on any single day since the end of the Holocaust – Israel’s security was paramount, bringing Australia’s Jewish community together, Nussbaum observed. As the war ground on, some of that unity dissolved, she believes. Sign up for Guardian Australia’s breaking news email “There’s deeper and deeper separation between nationalism and [the left],” she says, describing a cementing of extreme views and conversations that have become less open-minded. “The complexity of it really leads to that split in ideology,” she says. “Even within our little family it’s split. It’s very controversial.” That splintering goes well beyond the kitchen table. The initial pain and sorrow fomented determination within the Jewish community, according to Alex Ryvchin, the co-chief of the Executive Council of Australian Jewry, which channelled “rage and sorrow into communal unity. We are now more determined than we have ever been to fight for our place in this society.” And, while the ECAJ deplores conflict and mourns its loss of life, he says, “Israel’s war is just and necessary.” A year in, Sarah Schwartz, the executive officer of the Jewish Council of Australia, says the conflict has made it clear that the Jewish community does not speak with a single voice. The JCA was formed in February to give voice to progressive Jews, providing an alternative to the mainstream. “There’s been a real break in the Jewish consensus around Israel,” she says. Whether publicly or privately, “many Jewish people are growing more and more uncomfortable and asking more and more questions about Israel’s conduct, particularly given the absolute devastation that Israel has caused in Gaza.” There the death toll stands at more than 41,000, many of whom are women and children. Israel has lost nearly 350 young men and women fighting Hamas in Gaza, the ECAJ says. About 200 of the 820 signatories to the JCA’s core principles are anonymous because of the subsequent doxing and shaming that Schwartz says comes, in part, from within the Jewish community. “They can’t say that Israel’s acting on behalf of all Jewish people,” she says of groups that have reacted negatively to the formation of the council. “I don’t think that they can really just try to silence us out of existence any more.” *** Amid the turmoil, rates of antisemitism targeting Australia’s 100,000 Jews have leapt since the attacks of 7 October. In the six months from 1 October 2023 to 31 March 2024, there was a 427% increase in the number of anti-Jewish incidents from the same period the year before, ECAJ figures show. In the immediate aftermath of 7 October, incidents shot up by 738%. The ECAJ believes the figures – described as “shocking and confronting” by Jillian Segal in her inaugural speech as Australia’s first special envoy to combat antisemitism – represent a fraction of the real number because of underreporting. A lack of data makes the problem hard to tackle, Schwartz says. The problem is worsened by accusations of lying and deceit on the part of Jews, driven by ancient perceptions and prejudice, Ryvchin says. “The denial of antisemitism and the gaslighting of our community has to end,” he says. “The experiences of ordinary Australian Jews have been harrowing this past year.” *** In December Guardian Australia spoke with Elena, a grandmother and retired teacher who lived in Israel during the Yom Kippur war and now calls Sydney’s eastern suburbs home. At the time, she said her “trust in the world had been shattered” by the 7 October attacks. Today she is exhausted by all she has witnessed from afar. “There’s an overwhelming sadness, bordering on depression,” she says. “I just can’t bounce back.” In the intervening months, she has seen a tightening of extreme and divisive views among some within her circles. “Everybody’s just digging in. It’s sad to see people suddenly making observations about all Arabs or all Jews, as if there’s no diversity or different points of view. That’s shocking – and it’s getting more entrenched because people feel threatened.” In solidarity with Israel, she has attended small vigils and peaceful gatherings, but her hope, once unshakeable, is diminishing. In its place is a new and alien sense of being under siege, she says. “I don’t think that it will be possible to negotiate [with Hamas and Hezbollah], and I have never, ever felt that before. If we can’t move forward, then what can we do?” Her answer, for the time being, is to protect the innocence of her grandchildren – and go back to the gentle tenets of her religion. “At night, I actually say prayers for the hostages,” she says. “Jewish holidays are coming up and I’m composing in my mind how to get to God: please, help these hostages.”','Tensions in Israel and Gaza have caused upheaval for Australian-Israeli families, with relatives fleeing to safety as conflict escalates. The Jewish community in Australia faces division over support for Israel, with rising antisemitism incidents. Despite efforts for unity, extreme views and hate persist, impacting individuals like Elena who grapple with feelings of sadness and hopelessness.','Escalating tensions in Israel and Gaza lead to division and increased antisemitism in Australia's Jewish community.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/e3937c3ba37cc8fd6f52ce75f07b1286f33c994b/0_109_5896_3538/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2024/oct/07/australian-jews-deeply-worried-by-sense-of-a-schism-and-the-rise-in-antisemitism-a-year-on-from-7-october-ntwnfb','2024-10-06 14:00:10','2024-10-06 21:17:35'
15,'‘It’s quite evil’: a US-based Palestinian on the ‘nightmare’ of having family left in Gaza','On 10 January 2024, 35-year-old Dorgham Abusalim woke up to a flurry of messages: more than 40 missed phone calls and endless Facebook notifications. Abusalim had slept in later than usual, a sluggish 9.00am instead of his usual 6.30am start. Since 7 October, when Israel launched a catastrophic war on Gaza following Hamas’s attack that killed 1,200 people, his job offered him more flexible start times as a means of support. Abusalim was born in Gaza and lived there until he was 16. He has been based in Washington DC since 2015, but much of his family is still in Palestine. That Wednesday, as Abusalim rubbed the sleep out of his eyes, one particular notification caught his attention. It was a Facebook message from a former classmate in Gaza. It said, “my deepest condolences for your loved ones,” Abusalim recalled. Up until that point, four months into the war, none of his relatives had died. And his parents, who remained behind, had managed to stay alive. But, reading the Facebook message, Abusalim says he was struck with immediate confirmation: “It happened. Someone is gone.” He attempted to call his parents, but was unable to get through; Israel’s attacks in Gaza have caused chronic communication blackouts. He tried other family members, anyone with information on who was gone and what had happened. An update from his brother came within the hour: their father, Sameer, the 80-year-old patriarch of the family, had died. Israel’s restriction of aid had created a critical shortage of medicine, which Sameer needed to manage illnesses, including diabetes, hypertension and stomach ulcers, Abusalim said. “Dad had passed away in my sleep.” The grief of losing a loved one is a nonlinear journey through complicated pain, but Abusalim’s grief is multiplied by Israel’s war, a “genocide”, as he and a growing number of experts call it. Since 7 October, more than 42,000 Palestinian people have been killed. At least 96,000 have been injured, with more than 22,500 people sustaining “life-changing injuries”, including amputations and traumatic brain injuries, according to the United Nations. Abusalim spoke plainly about the war that killed his father and so many of his neighbors and friends, and the airstrikes that have flattened his home town of Deir al Balah, a quaint, farming town in the Gaza Strip. He sometimes tilted towards dry humor as he recounted the past year. At other moments, he spoke with shock and frustration, expressing genuine alarm about how the war continues a year later with no end in sight. “When I think of October 7 this year,” Abusalim said, sighing deeply, “I’m just trying to wrap my head around how it is still happening.” ‘This stuff breaks people’ Abusalim is not a “crier”, he said. He hasn’t joined a traditional grief group or sought out counseling. He’s had spurts of “cathartic” journaling, but his preferred way of processing grief has been action. “Part of my grieving has been my big mouth and loud advocacy,” he said. Abusalim speaks on educational panels and to reporters about the war. He’s lobbied congressional staff to push for a ceasefire resolution. “I’m doing the best that I can,” he said, “or the least that I can, by talking about what’s going on.” Abusalim and other Palestinians in the Washington metropolitian area have also testified to DC’s local council, sharing their personal experiences. And if there’s a protest happening, they’ll go together. His friendships with other local Palestinians and Arabs pre-date the war, he said, but have gotten stronger over the past year. “It’s reassuring, reinforcing and helpful that we’re not alone in this,” he said. “It’s a reminder that there is a lot of work ahead, and that’s precisely why our lives have to keep going.” Abusalim’s family is at once a bedrock of support and a reminder of the ongoing anguish in Gaza. When he speaks to relatives in Palestine, he tries to take their minds off the war around them. But many are preoccupied, as the country contends with mass starvation. “My 50-year-old cousin, a grown man, was crying [on the phone] because he can’t provide food and he’s hungry,” Abusalim said. “This stuff breaks people. It’s really quite evil that it’s happening by design.” Every morning, Abusalim FaceTimes with his mother Mudallala, as she was able to evacuate from Gaza to Cairo via the Rafah crossing after her husband’s death. “A nightmare trip”, Mudallala, who is blind, told her son. They catch up while he eats a breakfast of halloumi cheese with thyme and olive oil or hummus and eggs with sumac – Palestinian cuisine that serves as a “little reminder of home” for Abusalim. “For the past year,” he said, “our calls have revolved around all the news and the developments and what’s going on.” On Monday, they spoke about Israel’s bombing of Lebanon, which they likened to Israel’s invasion of the country in the 1980s. They both are avid viewers of Al Jazeera for updates, piecing together information across a seven-hour time difference. Oftentimes, they’ll talk about Sameer. “You bring up dad, she’ll cry.” ‘He was older than the state of Israel’ Only eight people attended the burial of Sameer Abusalim, mostly complete strangers and Mudallala. Members of the extended family could not travel, Abusalim said, fearing that they would be bombed on the journey over. “It was all done very, very quickly,” Abusalim said of the funeral, which happened only hours after Sameer’s death, as opposed to typical Islamic memorial services which take place over multiple days. “Dad deserved a whole lot more than that,” Abusalim said. “We have Israel to thank for messing this up for us.” A pillar of his community, Sameer was known for helping squash disputes between neighbors and sponsoring local schools. He was fiercely protective of his family and “very in love” with his wife, Abusalim said. “Oh God, they were so cheesy together,” he said, recalling how Sameer once wrote Mudallala a four-page love letter. The note is one of only two possessions Abusalim has from his father; the other is a simple, gold ring. Born in 1943 (“He was older than the state of Israel,” Abusalim said), Sameer worked as a farmer, growing sprawling rows of olive and orange trees on the family’s land. Later in life, he suffered a series of strokes, leaving him partially paralyzed and reliant on a wheelchair. Well before 7 October, Sameer’s family had to navigate his health conditions as they took shelter from Israeli bombardments. In 2014, the last time that Abusalim was in Gaza, the family house was hit with a “roof knock” bomb, a warning missile launched by the Israeli military before a larger strike. Abusalim had minutes to transport his father, mother, two sisters and nephew to safety. “I’m in the driver’s seat,” Abusalim recalled, “and I just freeze for a minute thinking, ‘If we’re seen fleeing, are they gonna hit the car?’” On 26 December 2023, Abusalim’s family home was bombed again. An airstrike had completely destroyed the doors and windows, this time making the home uninhabitable. The family escaped to a nearby aunt’s house with minor injuries. But Sameer, who had been wounded with shards of glass, wasn’t healing well. Less than three weeks later, he was gone. “What haunts me is the fact that I may never be able to visit his grave and pay my respects,” Abusalim said, voicing concern that Israel may attempt to permanently occupy Gaza. “There isn’t a day that goes by without me thinking of [his death]. He passed away, paralyzed, a displaced man. The indignity of not dying in your own home, at that age, is just something that pisses me off.” ‘You go back, but what’s next?’ The third of September would have been Sameer’s 81st birthday. “My sister in Egypt had prepared a cake with a photo of him printed on it,” Abusalim said. “My family does cheesy things.” After his father died, Abusalim traveled to Canada for an informal celebration of Sameer’s life with his siblings. He later traveled to Egypt for a month to be with Mudallala, who now lives with her daughter. “She’s very, very eager to go back home,” Abusalim said. “[But] our question to Mom has been, ‘You go back, but what’s next?’ There is no life there.” Abusalim also wants to return, nostalgic for the “the old Gaza, before the days of genocide reduced [it] to rubble”. But within that hope is the reality that the “old Gaza” was still a site of violence because of Israel, he said. “It wasn’t normal that we only had eight hours of electricity. It wasn’t normal that we were not allowed an airport or a seaport or freedom of movement. It wasn’t normal that our resources were controlled by others,” he said, calling it the “sick strategy of Israeli occupation”. But even with his disdain and frustration, he was firm in the knowledge that his people are strong. “If there is anything I know about us Palestinians, [it] is that we’re quite stubborn. We’re going to keep at it until our rights and dignity and sovereignty and independence are achieved.”','Dorgham Abusalim, a Palestinian living in Washington DC, learns of his father's death in Gaza due to Israeli attacks, where thousands have been killed and injured. He copes with grief through advocacy, speaking out against the war's impact on his family and community. Despite the tragedy, he remains resilient, strengthening bonds with local Palestinians and fighting for their rights and sovereignty.','A Palestinian man in Washington DC mourns the loss of his father in Gaza due to Israeli attacks and advocates for justice and awareness.','world','interactive','https://media.guim.co.uk/a2f04cd687ac6e38225c226b1969c5a0ca2fef63/0_1328_5304_3181/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2024/oct/06/palestinian-family-gaza-israel','2024-10-06 12:00:06','2024-10-06 12:00:47'
16,'‘What is it that keeps you wanting to survive?’ Giles Duley and Rwandan genocide survivor Olive Mutetamfura on resilience and forgiveness','In an elegant early Victorian building called the Organ Factory in London’s East End, Giles Duley, the photographer, presenter, chef and charity CEO, is addressing an event to mark his 53rd birthday and what should have been the visit of Olive Mutetamfura, a survivor of the Rwandan genocide. “Olive is unable to be here because immigration decided to revoke her visa,” he explains to around 100 people, wryly observing that her rejection is “a story that is somewhat appropriate” to the times. The positive news, he adds, is that she was able to secure a US visa and the following day he would fly to meet her in Las Vegas, where she was to speak to a convention of travel agents on what would be her first journey outside of Rwanda. “She’s going to have the time of her life,” he announces, “as am I.” Two days earlier, Duley had been documenting life on the frontline in Ukraine, and, after Las Vegas, he and Mutetamfura were flying to New York, where she was to address UN Women. His is a schedule that would exhaust many able-bodied people half his age, but Duley, who lost both his legs, an arm and very nearly his life in an explosion in Afghanistan, says he is “invigorated” by the energy in the hall. Like one of those hypothetical perpetual energy machines, he is himself the cause of the buzz in the room from which he draws energy. I’m sitting opposite the young photojournalist Emily Garthwaite, who spent six years living in Iraq, looking at humanitarian and environmental issues. She describes Duley as “inspirational” and her “mentor”. A number of the people gathered are involved in Legacy of War, the charity Duley set up after suffering his injuries. Others, like Garthwaite, have experience of working in conflict zones. All of them listen to Duley with rapt attention, which is understandable, because he is an impressive speaker. He talks a little about the charity and a project called Land for Women that buys land for war-affected women to set up collectives that they then own and control themselves. Olive is one such beneficiary, but the key thing for Duley is that she is now able to determine her own direction. Self-empowerment is central to his philosophy. “I don’t believe you can empower anyone else,” he tells the audience. “I learned that the hard way through my recovery in hospital. I was supported by the most amazing people, my family, doctors, nurses, physiotherapists and occupational therapists, but none of them empowered me. What they did is they broke down the barriers that stopped me from carrying myself.” He tells a story about the first two people to help him directly after he was blown up. He was almost certain at the time that he was going to die, but he was still conscious and able to speak. He told the two medics who got him on to a helicopter and took him back to Kandahar that if by some miracle he survived, he would take them both out for a drink. Eighteen months later, having come through a hellish recovery, he was just learning to walk with prosthetic legs, and he decided it was time to honour his promise. He flew to Chicago and went to the bar where he had arranged to meet the two men. He was racked with nerves, he tells the audience, because the medics were from the 101st Airborne and as tough as they come and he, after all, is an anti-war photographer. Plus the first time they met, he says, was “kind of hectic”. But the men tearfully embraced one another like lost brothers and immediately embarked on an epic drinking session. At some point, one of the medics decided it would be a good idea for all three of them to get tattooed with the date of Duley’s rescue, as he’d never seen anyone as badly injured survive. “I did say to them,” he deadpans, “that I didn’t actually need a visual reminder of that day.” It feels a little odd to be laughing at the comic travails of a man with only one limb. But to Duley, it’s vital to locate the humanity in misfortune, no matter how raw, and in humanity there is almost always humour, which, after all, is a form of resilience. “I believe resilience is life’s gift for the hard times we go through,” he says. “The more extreme our experience, the more resilience we have. And the most resilient woman I know is Olive.” *** A few days later, Duley is sitting next to Mutetamfura in an Airbnb in New York. She is proud-looking, wearing a bright patterned dress with her hair pulled back in a tight top-knot. Although she has come from a modest suburb of Kigali, and arrived first in the casino capital of the world, then the city that never sleeps, she seems unaffected by any cultural dislocation. They had driven past the Sphere, the giant $2.3bn immersive auditorium that is the latest addition to Las Vegas’s outlandish entertainment spots. Everyone drew Mutetamfura’s attention to this hi-tech marvel, and her underwhelmed response was: “Yes, it’s just like the Kigali conference centre.” But then she has seen sights that most of us could not begin to imagine. She met Duley seven years ago when he was doing a project on survivors, a sector of society in whom he has an abiding fascination. The charity Humanity &amp; Inclusion put the pair together and Duley interviewed Mutetamfura in what he describes as a “formal” manner. Between 7 April and 19 July 1994, upwards of 500,000 Rwandans – by the Rwandan government’s own estimate, more than 1 million – were slaughtered when the majority Hutu ethnic group set about killing the minority Tutsis and their moderate Hutu defenders. Mutetamfura barely survived the horror and her story was suitably harrowing, but Duley got the sense in that first interview that there was more to it. The following day, her birthday, he returned to her house with a birthday cake, and they cooked together and had a couple of beers. A few years ago, Duley made a series for Vice, the US cable channel, in which he visited places blasted by war and cooked food with families he met. He believes that food is the antithesis of war, the means of bringing people together rather than breaking them apart. As they cooked, Mutetamfura saw something in Duley that she recognised. “She told me she could see the sadness in my eyes,” he says. At the end of the evening, she told him that she would tell him her “real story now”. It’s the same story, give or take a few details, that she recounted to the convention in Las Vegas and to UN Women, and the same story that she now shares with me. On 6 April, 30 years ago, Mutetamfura was in hospital, giving birth to her third child, a son. A few miles away, a plane carrying Rwanda’s president, Juvénal Habyarimana, and neighbouring Burundi’s president, Cyprien Ntaryamira, both Hutu, was shot down. The identity of the culprits still remains the subject of dispute. The ethnic distinctions between Hutus and Tutsis were largely the invention of Belgian colonisers, but that didn’t stop them from being exploited by those seeking to use Habyarimana’s assassination as the reason to target the minority Tutsis. Mutetamfura is Tutsi, but she had been accompanied to hospital by her best friend, Immaculée, a Hutu, and that night she lay in bed listening to the radio as Hutu leaders broadcast instructions to rise up and kill the “cockroaches”. The following day the killing began, mostly by machete. Rape, too, was widespread. In hospital, Mutetamfura soon learned that her village had been attacked and her other two children killed, along with her husband and her parents, her siblings and her in-laws. As she tried to absorb this incomprehensible news, from beyond the hospital she could hear the Hutu gangs scraping their machetes on the ground and demanding that the Tutsis come out. “I couldn’t understand why a person would kill someone just based on their ethnicity,” she says, recalling the shock she was in. For a while, the nuns who ran the hospital held out against Hutu militias marauding around the city. But after a few days the militia stormed the hospital, separated the Tutsis – in Rwanda at that time everyone carried identity cards that specified whether they were Tutsi or Hutu – and dragged them out. In the mayhem Mutetamfura had little choice but to leave her son, Jonathan, as she was manhandled to a market where other young Tutsi mothers and their children were taken, along with the sick and elderly. Before Mutetamfura’s eyes they were indiscriminately hacked to death. She feigned her own death as bodies fell on top of her, and lay beneath the corpses for three days. Of the 1,200 people gathered in the market, only 15 survived. When she finally managed to free herself from this waking nightmare, she hid in a river during the day and on its banks at night. Constantly trying to avoid passing gangs, she was powerless to prevent insects from burrowing into her legs. After several days of this purgatory, she somehow made it back to her village, where she was saved from the mob by her uncle by marriage, a Hutu. She soon learned, however, that this uncle had also been instrumental in the murder of her family (a vital detail that, in their first interview, she held back from Duley). She stayed in hiding for several weeks under his precarious protection, witnessing more hideous crimes that he committed, before she once again took refuge in the woods. Eventually she was rescued by the Rwandan Patriotic Front and taken to hospital. But her ordeal was far from over. Once the Hutu militias had been defeated by the RPF, she returned once more to her village and found six orphaned children who were either part of her extended family or were the children of friends who had been murdered. She decided to adopt them all and move to the capital, Kigali. Lacking family support, she was forced to turn to sex work, where her clients seemed to her indistinguishable from the killers. She once described to Duley how she felt about herself at this time: “I was not human, I was a dustbin. Every man that slept with me felt like a perpetrator. But I didn’t care.” The one bright piece of news in this bottomlessly dark period was that her old friend Immaculée managed to track her down, and brought her Jonathan, her then almost four-year-old son who survived the genocide thanks to lacking an identity card in hospital. Through an interpreter, Mutetamfura recounts these details to me in a calm voice with an almost emotionless expression, but stops occasionally to wipe tears from her eyes. It’s the only sign that her story is not just a testament but a scar – psychological and physical (the insects that bore into her as she hid in the river had to be surgically removed) – that can never entirely heal. To revisit such searing trauma is undoubtedly an act of courage. “It can feel like I’m back to the 7 April and it’s all happening again,” she says. “But what gives me strength is that I tell the story to inspire people, and that makes me feel safe each time I revisit it.” I ask what it was like to speak to a convention room full of people in a strange city on her first trip abroad. “I felt strong,” she says. Perhaps more impressive still was the talk she gave to UN Women at the UN Headquarters, which was seen online around the world. “It made me feel like an important person,” she says. One aspect of Mutetamfura’s survival and recovery that she thinks is critical is the role of forgiveness. How was she able to come to any kind of reconciliation with her uncle, the man who oversaw the murder of her children, her husband and parents? “I took it as a way to be able to forgive myself,” she says. Although by all sane standards of justice, she had nothing to forgive herself for, she nevertheless carried around survivor’s guilt for many years, the belief that her children had been killed because she was not with them, and then the guilt for the sex work she was forced into to feed her adopted family, and for the alcohol she drank to numb the pain. Forgiving the killers, she explains, enabled her to reach a kind of peace within herself. Her uncle served 15 years in prison and was then released under the terms of the national reconciliation process. Despite admitting his guilt, he has never fully apologised for his role in her family’s murder. Rather, says Duley, who has met him, the uncle thinks of himself as a victim, someone who was misled by those in authority. Duley doesn’t buy that excuse, not least because the uncle, who was also a photographer, was relatively well educated, someone who prided himself on reading Nelson Mandela. Still, his self-exculpation is not really the point. “I’ve discussed this before with Olive,” Duley says “and in many ways I think it was about releasing the power these men in her community held over her. I think she released herself to live her life.” In Duley’s case, although he was mutilated by an anti-personnel mine, he never took it personally, as it were, so there were no identifiable culprits to forgive. And as for the device itself that robbed him of his limbs, he’s even photographed similar IEDs in the manner of found objects, transforming weapons of savage destruction into disturbingly beautiful artworks. Yet he still had to find a way to get through days that would crush most of us, including the 46 laid up in hospital during which he could only communicate by blinking his eyes. “What is it,” he asks, “that keeps you wanting to survive? Why would you fight to stay alive when you’ve lost everything?” He’s in a well-informed position to pose the question, but he’s not referring to himself. He’s speaking about survivors in general, everyone who has managed to endure the unendurable. Mutetamfura herself has told Duley that she didn’t want to live after her children were killed, and yet she remained perfectly still when she was trapped under the bodies, and held on in the river as insects feasted on her, when she could have just let go. Duley, who experienced his own moments in which he would have welcomed nothingness, thinks survival is an instinct that transcends rational thought, but one that produces a greater understanding of what we’re capable of. At the same time, he emphasises that it doesn’t mean that survivors can cope with everything. Loneliness, despair and the memories of what they’ve been through can all crowd in at any point. He had some low periods during Covid lockdowns. And he’s fully aware that not everyone will respond to catastrophic events by feeling stronger and more focused, as he does. Resilience, he says, is also about accepting what has happened, and that there will be bad days. For Mutetamfura, these are now the good days. Her son recently graduated from university with a degree in cooperative management, and she regularly sees two of her adopted daughters. In Rwanda, she says, ethnicity is no longer to be found on identity cards and they are all Rwandans, not Tutsis or Hutus. “I think about the events of 30 years ago every day,” she says, “but I have a life beyond the tragedy.” She says she wants to travel to more countries, and to share her story with people from around the world. It’s an extraordinary tale, one that deserves to be heard, especially by other survivors, but also by everyone who could do with being reminded of the human potential to overcome the most devastating setbacks. Who knows, perhaps one day this amazing woman from the country to which the last government wanted to send asylum seekers may even be allowed to travel to this country. For more information about Land for Women, including details of how to support the organisation, click here','Photographer Giles Duley and Olive Mutetamfura, a survivor of the Rwandan genocide, share their stories of resilience and empowerment. Duley, a triple amputee, founded Legacy of War charity, supporting war-affected women. Mutetamfura's harrowing tale includes surviving the genocide and finding forgiveness. Both emphasize the importance of self-empowerment and resilience in overcoming trauma and rebuilding lives.','Photographer Giles Duley and Rwandan genocide survivor Olive Mutetamfura share their stories of resilience and empowerment in the face of adversity.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/31a40d20f40d611d637a976806c30aee0e7312b3/0_430_10002_6002/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/giles-duley-olive-mutetamfura-rwandan-genocide-survivor-war-photographer-afghanistan','2024-10-06 11:00:03','2024-10-06 11:00:03'
17,'UK urges Israel to show restraint amid fears Middle East conflict could spread','The UK government is advising Israel to show “restraint” as Keir Starmer warned that “sparks”’ from the Middle East conflict could “light touchpapers in our communities at home”. As the war between Israel and Hamas in the Palestinian territory approaches its first anniversary, on 7 October, Israeli strikes on Saturday night sent shock waves across the Lebanese capital, following days of Israeli bombing in suburbs of the city that are thought to be strongholds for the Iran-backed group Hezbollah. Meanwhile, Gaza’s civil defence agency said 24 people were killed and dozens wounded in an Israeli airstrike on a mosque in central Gaza early on Sunday. One hundred and one Israeli hostages taken on 7 October 2023 have still not been freed. Peter Kyle, a UK cabinet minister, did not rule out the possibility of the UK military helping Israel attack Iran, but noted any “operational decision to be taken” would be based on “delicate negotiations”. Kyle also noted the prime minister had spoken to the UK’s allies in the last few days, including Joe Biden, Emmanuel Macron and Olaf Scholz, resulting in “unanimous” advice that Israel “must exercise restraint” in the region. However, Kyle said the UK government “can’t instruct Israel, as a sovereign state to do anything”. Speaking on the BBC One’s Sunday with Laura Kuenssberg programme, Kyle said: “We do understand deeply what Israel has suffered in this year, but the only way forward is restraint, a ceasefire to create the space for a political solution, because this is getting more complicated. The war is deepening and it is not moving towards the peace that we need, so we are urging the steps that will take us towards that peaceful settlement”. The prime minister, in an article for the Sunday Times, called out the “vile hatred” that had been directed towards Jews and Muslims since the 7 October attacks. He urged all parties involved in the conflict to “act with restraint and return to political, not military solutions”, having previously expressed his concern that the “region is on the brink” after Iran’s missile attack on Israel. Writing in the newspaper, he said: “The flames from this deadly conflict now threaten to consume the region. And the sparks light touchpapers in our own communities here at home.” He added: “There are always some who would use conflict abroad to stoke conflict here. Since October 7, we have watched vile hatred against Jews and Muslims rise in our communities.” The Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office said more than 250 people had been able to leave Lebanon so far on the three chartered flights that had already left Beirut. There are no further scheduled charter flights, but the situation would be kept under review. The shadow foreign secretary, Andrew Mitchell, told Sky News’s Sunday Morning with Trevor Phillips programme: “The Iranians, of course, have already responded and on both occasions when they attacked – directly from Iran – Israel, British military forces were engaged in trying to help. “Israel is a very strong ally. Of course we want to see de-escalation, we want to see negotiation and we want to see people’s eyes lifted towards the possibility of a political solution.” Zarah Sultana, an MP who has been suspended from the Labour party and is sitting as an independent, told the BBC “there is no scenario” where the UK’s involvement in an attack on Iran could be justified. She added: “If we look at the past two decades of British foreign policy in the Middle East there are catalogues of failures and clearly lessons haven’t been learned. When we look at what the British public think, 56% of them back a ban on arms sales to Israel, only 17% oppose that, 67% believe Israel has committed war crimes and 84% want Netanyahu arrested if he enters the UK. Clearly there’s a detachment from the British public opinion and what the government are saying.” The former Conservative foreign secretary Sir Malcolm Rifkind said what was needed from both Israelis and Palestinians was “leadership that is prepared not to forget the past, but to move on to a political dialogue”.','The UK government is urging Israel to exercise restraint in the ongoing conflict with Hamas in the Palestinian territory, with concerns rising over escalating tensions. Israeli strikes on Lebanon and Gaza have caused casualties, while the UK considers military involvement based on delicate negotiations. International leaders advise for a ceasefire and political solution, emphasizing the need for de-escalation and dialogue between Israelis and Palestinians.','UK advises Israel to show restraint in the Middle East conflict, as tensions rise following Israeli strikes on Lebanon and Gaza.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/8a2ba670f4effc2c81f343521559a5bb63f929b2/0_81_5907_3546/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/uk-urges-israel-to-show-restraint-amid-fears-middle-east-conflict-could-spread','2024-10-06 09:54:55','2024-10-07 00:54:28'
18,'‘The mosque was closed but the nightclub opened its doors’: bombed-out families find shelter in Beirut venue','Inside the cavernous black walls of Beirut’s most exclusive after-hours club, two people are asleep on sofas tucked under the DJ booth. Beds fill the section normally used for bottle service, and piles of blankets are piled high on tables around the dancefloor. Outside the guest entrance to the hulking venue is a family who fled rural southern Lebanon camps. Now their goat is chewing leaves from a tree branch that supports a washing line and a makeshift kitchen. Ali Ahmed sits outside the backstage entrance with 11 members of his family, smiling when he talks about the warm welcome they received at Beirut’s best-known nightclub, one he’d only ever heard about before on local television. His expression grows darker when he describes fleeing Beirut’s southern suburbs last week amid a fierce Israeli bombing campaign. The family slept in the open in the capital’s Martyr’s Square, he says, describing their first night in the shadow of the imposing cobalt blue domes of the Mohammed al-Amin mosque. “The mosque kept its doors closed. But this nightclub opened its doors to us when the mosque didn’t,” he says. Ahmed considers his family lucky – not only were they able to claim a spot in the club’s VIP area but staying at the nightclub has meant food delivery, clean bathrooms and privacy that those in many of Lebanon’s makeshift shelters lack. Some 400 people displaced by Israeli bombardments across southern Lebanon and the Dahiyeh suburb of Beirut are currently sheltering inside Skybar, which until recently welcomed guests to sip champagne on the top floor with a view of the Mediterranean and then party until the early hours in the Skin club below. The families sleeping on the black-and-white floor of the club entrance, around the mirrored bars and beneath the plush black upholstered balconies of the nightclub are just some of the 1.2 million people now displaced in Lebanon. UN officials said late last week that almost 900 shelters set up by the government were full. Staff at the nightclub, who are now coordinating its day-to-day operations as a shelter, said that the owner of the venue was moved to open it up after seeing displaced families sleeping on the streets outside. In less than two weeks, the country of just 5 million people has witnessed a mass displacement crisis, mounting Israeli airstrikes and a troop invasion in its south. More than 1,000 people were killed over 10 days in late September and hundreds more in the period since as Israeli forces repeatedly struck a swathe of Beirut’s suburbs and southern Lebanon. Whole communities have fled to the mountains around the capital while those with the necessary means have crammed on to the dwindling numbers of flights leaving Beirut airport on the lone national airline still running. At least one plane from the Lebanese national carrier was seen landing at the airport as fierce Israeli bombardments struck nearby last week, sending columns of smoke and fire into the air over southern Beirut. Israel’s battle against Hezbollah, Iran’s most powerful proxy, began when the group declared its support for Hamas’s attack on Israel in October last year. After months of Hezbollah launching rocket salvoes into Israeli territory and Israel responding with airstrikes deep into Lebanese territory, recent weeks have seen a dramatic escalation, including the assassination of Hezbollah’s long-time leader, Hassan Nasrallah, in a subterranean bunker under Dahiyeh. Every night last week, Israeli forces pummelled the area and issued mass evacuation orders for much of southern Lebanon in what they say is an effort to target members of Hezbollah or infrastructure employed by the group. A particularly powerful wave of airstrikes on Dahiyeh late in the week shook the ground across southern Beirut, reportedly targeting Nasrallah’s potential successor Hashem Safieddine. Israeli forces also launched a ground invasion of southern Lebanon, sparking fierce fighting that has so far seen at least eight Israeli soldiers killed in battles that Hezbollah and its supporters said would provide their strongest chance of a decisive victory against their oldest enemy. “You have won a few rounds through your air raids and assassinations, but the war continues, and we will prevail,” Hezbollah spokesperson Mohammad Afif declared, addressing Israeli forces during a media tour of the destruction in Beirut’s southern suburbs. Entire neighbourhoods were deserted, the few signs of life being the young men on motorbikes carrying posters of Nasrallah, which were also affixed to the towering and sometimes smouldering piles of rubble from Israeli airstrikes. Those now sheltering at the nightclub are pinning their hopes on a Hezbollah victory in southern Lebanon as a way for them to eventually return to their homes. Nada Hammoud, a teacher who fled strikes on the Chiyah neighbourhood of southern Beirut for a bed on the edge of the dancefloor at Skin, says she is hopeful that the war will be quick, maybe lasting even less than a week. Others say they are prepared to spend a year living at the club if necessary to help clinch a victory on Lebanon’s southern border. “This country doesn’t deserve this. But we support Hezbollah – they will win this. This is our country, our land: there is no place for Israel in the south,” says Hammoud. Lebanon’s underfunded and often highly constrained military, she adds, “isn’t allowed to carry a single bullet, so we need Hezbollah”. As Lebanon struggles to weather a displacement crisis, the fighting between Israel and Tehran’s proxies that has upended relations across the surrounding region now threatens to grow into an increasingly direct conflict with Iran. Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu is reportedly weighing a response to the salvo of 180 ballistic missiles that rained down over Israeli territory last week in response to Nasrallah’s killing. In a visit to Beirut to meet the caretaker prime minister, Najib Mikati – and the increasingly powerful speaker of parliament, Nabih Berri of the Shia Amal movement – the Iranian foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, said that Tehran still backed a ceasefire – provided that it occurred simultaneously with a halt to fighting in Gaza. Any ceasefire, he added, must also be accepted by Hezbollah. “We support efforts for a ceasefire, provided that, first, the rights of the Lebanese people are respected and it is accepted by the resistance,” he said, in reference to the group. The promise of a Hezbollah victory is not lost on Ahmed and his family either. “We are powerful and we are winning,” he says cheerfully, sitting next to his elderly mother who chimes in to share her support for the group. For now, Ahmed and 10 members of his family are enjoying their position in the VIP area of the nightclub, a place that normally requires a crisp $100 bill to enter, and where people often make even pricier bids for a table. They were only the second family to enter the nightclub, he explained, so they were able to pick a prime spot. “You’re behind the DJ booth!” bouncer Mohammed Ali tells him, laughing as he opens the black backstage door for some children who want to run into the outdoor area and play. Ali, more used to working the night shift and dealing with rowdy partygoers, says he takes pride in making sure everyone inside the nightclub was being given three meals a day and medical care if they need it. “Be careful, don’t rush,” he gently tells the three children as they clamour at his legs while pushing through the nightclub door.','Amid Israeli bombings and conflict with Hezbollah, Beirut's exclusive nightclub becomes a shelter for displaced families, providing food, accommodations, and medical care. Families displaced by the bombings find refuge in the club, highlighting the dire situation in Lebanon with over 1.2 million displaced people. The nightclub owner opened its doors after seeing families sleeping on the streets, offering a temporary home as the country faces escalating violence and mass displacement.','Beirut's exclusive nightclub turns into a shelter for displaced families amid Israeli bombings and conflict with Hezbollah, offering food and accommodations.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/b33fa040d3320677da71998114be9460ee263554/0_0_2500_1500/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/the-mosque-was-closed-but-the-nightclub-opened-its-doors-bombed-out-families-find-shelter-in-beirut-venue','2024-10-06 05:00:46','2024-10-06 05:00:46'
19,'A year of war accelerates ‘silent departure’ of Israel’s elite','This summer, the Nobel laureate Prof Aaron Ciechanover joined a group of prominent Israelis gathered in the ruins of the Nir Oz kibbutz to demand a hostage release and ceasefire deal. Nir Oz was the worst hit of all the communities targeted by Hamas on 7 October, with a quarter of its residents kidnapped or killed. Twenty-nine are still in Gaza. If the hostages were not brought back, the basic social contract that underpinned Israeli society would unravel, the 77-year-old professor of medicine warned – with catastrophic consequences for the entire country. He cited an accelerating “brain drain” of doctors and other professionals as a worrying sign that some of Israel’s elite already feel they no longer have a future in the country. And without them, Israel itself might struggle to have a future. Ciechanover is a long-term critic of Benjamin Netanyahu and joined protests against his government before the war. But concern about this trend is not limited to political opponents of the Israeli leader. Earlier this year, Netanyahu’s former chair of the National Economic Council, Eugene Kandel, joined forces with the administrative expert Ron Tzur to warn that Israel faces an existential threat. In a paper calling for a new political settlement, they warned that under a business-as-usual scenario “there is a considerable likelihood that Israel will not be able to exist as a sovereign Jewish state in the coming decades”. Among the threats they highlighted were rising emigration, particularly among the people who have built up Israel’s hi-tech sector and the schools and hospitals vital to attracting the global elite. “Israel’s locomotive of growth is innovation, and that is driven by a small group of several tens of thousands of people in a country of 10 million,” the paper warned. “The weight of their departure from the country is immense in comparison to their number.” The problem precedes the 7 October attacks and the war that followed, as demographic and political shifts have prompted some secular, liberal Israelis to question their future in a state increasingly dominated by religious traditionalists. Noam is a father of three with businesses that include a PR consultancy and a cannabis pharmacy. He expected that his 40s would be a time of “less doing, more enjoying”, after decades of hard work. Instead, he and his wife spend evenings poring over school options in European countries as they weigh up where to start a new life. The war increased the urgency of the search, but it has been a decision born out of longstanding concerns. “The main reason we are leaving is that we are seeking a better future for our children. Even if peace can be brokered tomorrow, we still can’t see a future we want to be a part of,” Noam said. “The demographics speak for themselves.” He thinks Israel’s economy will be hampered by the growing number of ultra-orthodox young people not qualified for professional jobs because they do not study maths or science, or speak English. Socially, he fears the rise of religious conservatives will make life hard for secular Jews. “If you ask me what we are headed for, you can look at the Iranian model, where religion plays a major role in daily life. “Even without the enemies we have all around [the region], that’s a good enough reason for any child loving parent to take his children away from harm.” Secular Israelis who prioritise living in a liberal democracy are a shrinking portion of Israel’s population, said Uri Ram, professor of sociology and anthropology at Ben Gurion University of the Negev. By 2015, only a minority – although, at 45%, a large one – of the Jewish population in Israel defined themselves as secular, and that is shrinking as religious and ultra-orthodox Jewish families, on average, have more children. Data from the first class at elementary schools in 2023 showed that only 40% of children were in the secular stream, he said. “There is a growing problem of ‘brain drain’, and it will increase, firstly, if the military risk is not reduced and, secondly, if the state does indeed turn more populist-autocratic,” said Ram, who has researched the struggle for Israel’s future between liberal, mostly secular Israelis like Noam and a group he describes as ethno-religious traditionalists. “In these situations, the upper middle classes will send their young generations abroad. Jews are well networked in desired academic and professional markets abroad, and family and work connections will assist the integration of young, educated Israeli immigrants in the desired locations.” While the horrors of 7 October are not the root cause of departures, they have accelerated them for many Israelis. Noam said over the last year that five or six families at his children’s school had taken their children out of classes to head abroad, and that he wanted to give his children back a “normal” childhood after a year of alarms and constant threats. After Hamas-led militants killed 1,200 people, most of them civilians, some Israelis felt failed by a state and army that had promised security, and that still has not yet brought back all the hostages held in Gaza. Others felt their social contract with the state had broken down, as they sent their children to die as soldiers while tens of thousands of ultra-orthodox men were exempted from military service. “All the elders, the people I hold dear, they say: go, leave. These are people who fought, played an active role in building this place,” Noam said. “The other thing they tell us is: never send your kids to the military. This is a major, major shift.” Dror Sadot and her partner also decided they had to speed up their planned departure after the war started. They were horrified by how many Israelis were supporting a war that has killed more than 41,000 Palestinians, the majority of them civilians, and felt isolated at home. “It wasn’t even just the usual suspects. People who consider themselves as leftists started talking about revenge, saying this is a just war,” she said. They booked a flight to Berlin a month after 7 October and Sadot does not think she will go back. Although learning German is a struggle, she feels at home in other ways. “In Israel, I’m considered as crazy in the best case, in the worst case a traitor. At least here my opinions are accepted,” she said. Most of her friends would like to leave as well. “Everyone is talking about it, a few have done it, but it takes time, and not everyone has the privilege to leave. Especially if we talk about Palestinians, but also not all Israelis have a second passport, or they have family [responsibilities],” she said. It is hard to evaluate the scale of departures so far. In 2023, during the prewar domestic turmoil over Netanyahu’s judicial reforms, there was a net departure from Israel of between 30,000 and 40,000 people, the newspaper Haaretz reported. Immigration is not only one-way: some Israelis abroad have seen a country in crisis and decided to return. Noam Bardin, a former chief executive of the satnav app Waze, flew back to Israel on 8 October. Tech firms drive the economy but only employ 10% of the workforce, Bardim told Haaretz in a recent interview, warning that, without that talent, Israel’s recent years of economic success could unravel. “That’s only 400,000 people, 50,000 of whom comprise the main engine – engineers, senior executives at funds, whom the whole world is trying to recruit. If these people leave the country, we’ll become Argentina.” Ciechanover fears the process is accelerating faster than is captured by official statistics or anecdotal observations. It takes time to pass the exams needed to practise in another country, and find jobs, housing and schools. Many colleagues don’t tell friends or family when they start this process. “We call it silent departing,” said Ciechanover. “They won’t let anyone know until they board the airplane.” He cited the recent loss of a senior paediatrician who announced she had decided to extend a fellowship for three years days before she was expected back in Israel. Committed to Israel, he flips between hope and despair for its future, but intends to see it take shape from his home. “I am not going to be an emigrant,” he said. “I’m proud of my old country, and not looking for a new one.”','Israeli professionals, including Nobel laureate Prof Aaron Ciechanover, are contemplating leaving the country due to concerns about the future. Factors such as a brain drain of elite professionals, demographic changes favoring religious traditionalists, and a shift towards populism are prompting emigration. The recent war and political unrest have accelerated these departures, with individuals citing a desire for a better future for their children and a sense of not fitting into the current social and political landscape of Israel.','Israeli professionals, concerned about the country's future, are considering emigrating due to political and demographic shifts.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/9fbdbf66e3cb094ede4f835d4ed72b652ff784a5/0_122_4120_2472/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/as-war-and-religion-rages-israels-secular-elite-contemplate-a-silent-departure','2024-10-06 04:00:42','2024-10-06 20:06:45'
20,'‘I had to evacuate five times’: a year in the life of a Gaza doctor battling to help victims','The confines of Gaza’s Nasser hospital are unrecognisable from just a year ago, its regular patients now joined by a flood of war-wounded and the homeless sheltering in its courtyards and corridors. Even many of its doctors are new. As fighting has shifted through the Gaza Strip during the past year of war, hospitals have been forced to close and doctors to move, seeking the next place to safely operate. Nasser hospital in the southern city of Khan Younis is now one of the few left operating at any level. Dr Mohammed Abu Mughaisib, deputy medical coordinator for Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) in Palestine, is now leading a team working out of the hospital, having shuttled between different locations for the past year. “The hospitals are not the hospitals that we used to know,” he says. “Hospitals have specific conditions; they’re organised, there’s only patients [there], but during this war hospitals are places where people are sheltering, bringing their tents, sleeping in the car park and even in the wards because they thought the hospitals are secure.” In reality, even hospitals have often been far from safe, with more than 500 attacks on healthcare facilities in Gaza in the past 12 months of war, according to the UN, including bombing and raids of some of the biggest, such as Nasser and Gaza City’s al-Shifa hospital. Mughaisib has been displaced from Gaza City and then central Gaza’s al-Nuseirat camp. Nasser hospital, where he now works, was besieged and raided by Israeli troops in January and February. While most staff, patients and displaced people fled, those who stayed behind described torture at the hands of the Israeli forces, who claimed they had intelligence that Hamas had operated from the hospital. It has been a struggle to keep working, he says. “The medical staff are part of the population: they evacuate from one place to another, they are displaced, they can be working in the surgical theatre or hospital and receive news that their family have been injured or killed by an airstrike.” Fears for the safety of his own family weighed heavily on Mughaisib. One day in November, when he was on his way to work in Khan Younis, he received a call from his wife telling him that his children had narrowly escaped an airstrike. They had been standing on the street outside the home they were sheltering in. Only moments after they came inside, an airstrike hit a house opposite, killing 20 people including women and children. In February, he was able to evacuate his wife, three children and father to Cairo. “I had felt that something was blocking my chest. I was relieved because now I knew they were in a safe, secure place, far from this suffering, far from this fear and destruction, and that they were finally able to eat properly, sleep properly, drink properly. And then I continued working.” After the focus of Israeli ground operations turned to Khan Younis, including Nasser hospital itself, Mughaisib and his teams shifted southwards to Rafah. It was to the same city that hundreds of thousands of other Gazans also fled – where they were told by Israel they would be safe – turning the small community into a place that now hosted the majority of Gaza’s population. They operated out of the Rafah Indonesian field hospital until, in May, that area was also made the target of Israeli military operations and people had to flee again, either back to Khan Younis or central Gaza, or another declared safe zone, the al-Mawasi camp on the coast. MSF operates there too, but Mughaisib says that camp has also seen deadly strikes. “I needed to evacuate five times from one place to another in the south area due to the threat of a military operation in Rafah. I was alone with my only pet, my cat, moving from one place to another,” he says. Gaza’s healthcare system is in tatters. According to the UN, only 17 hospitals are partially functioning while 19 are completely out of service. Most primary healthcare centres are also out of action, and less than half of patients in critical need of treatment are able to get out of Gaza. As well as conflict-related injuries, Mughaisib and his colleagues must treat wider health issues. He says they are seeing a rise in infectious diseases such as gastroenteritis – spread through polluted water – skin infections and hepatitis A. Aid agencies have repeatedly sounded the alarm about access to food and clean water. Last week, the World Health Organization said it was planning to begin a second phase of polio vaccinations after the first case of the disease in the country for 25 years was reported in August. Though moments of joy are few, Mughaisib says he does feel some satisfaction when he and his colleagues are able to entertain the children and distract them from their pain. “I always remember the children – children severely injured, children who had lost a limb, a child of two years [old] who had both legs amputated,” he says. “I’m a doctor and so I have to show my strength in front of them, to support them, but these are the patients I remember.” For Mughaisib and the other doctors operating out of Nasser hospital, they are now trying to cling on and provide any service they can. The hospital runs off generators, but these sometimes fall silent when they run out of fuel, and its staff are constantly on edge, working until the moment comes when they might have to move again. They have long hoped for a ceasefire, which they say is desperately needed, but, after repeated promises, no longer have much expectation. “After a year now, the word ceasefire is a wish, a dream – it might come true or not, I don’t know. We thought the ceasefire would be in Ramadan, for Eid, but it did not happen; we thought it would be in the end of summer, it did not happen,” says Mughaisib. “Of course we wish there would be a ceasefire but we reached a moment that we don’t believe that it will happen.”','Amidst ongoing conflict in Gaza, Nasser hospital operates as one of the few remaining facilities treating war-wounded and homeless individuals. Dr. Mohammed Abu Mughaisib leads a team facing constant displacement and dangers, with hospitals being targets of attacks. The healthcare system is in disarray, with only a few hospitals functioning, hindering access to critical treatment. Doctors like Mughaisib treat conflict injuries alongside rising infectious diseases, striving to bring some relief to patients amidst a lack of ceasefire hope.','Doctors in Gaza's Nasser hospital face challenges providing healthcare amidst war, displacement, and attacks on hospitals.','world','article','https://media.guim.co.uk/af7f3bceff20567e094d723bd1f40a26c60fbd8d/0_250_6000_3600/500.jpg','en','https://www.theguardian.com/world/2024/oct/06/i-had-to-evacuate-five-times-a-year-in-the-life-of-a-gaza-doctor-battling-to-help-victims','2024-10-06 04:00:42','2024-10-06 04:00:42'
